Linux job control helps you manage commands running in the terminal. It lets you move tasks between foreground and background, check running jobs, and stop or resume them.

Foreground and background
Foreground means the command is taking over the terminal.

Background means the command runs while you keep using the terminal.

Commands
& runs a command in the background.

jobs shows background or stopped jobs in the current terminal session.

fg brings a job to the foreground.

bg continues a stopped job in the background.

Example
bash
sleep 300 &
jobs
fg %1
bg %1
Process priority
Linux can give some processes more or less CPU preference. This is controlled by the niceness value. Lower niceness means higher priority, and higher niceness means lower priority.

Commands
nice -n 10 sleep 300 starts a new process with lower priority.

renice 10 -p PID changes the priority of an already running process.

Example
bash
nice -n 10 sleep 300
ps aux | grep sleep
renice 10 -p 1234
Finding processes
ps aux | grep sleep is used to search for a running process by name. ps aux shows processes, and grep sleep filters the result to lines containing sleep. 

Keeping jobs running
nohup sleep 300 & runs a command in the background and keeps it running even if the terminal closes. nohup protects the job from the hangup signal sent when the session ends.

Example
bash
nohup sleep 300 &
IP addressing
An IP address is like a device’s address on a network. It helps data know where to go and where to come back from.

Main types
IPv4 uses addresses like 192.168.1.10.

IPv6 is the newer format and supports many more devices.

Public and private IP
Public IP is seen on the internet.

Private IP is used inside a local network like home Wi‑Fi.

Quick example
bash
curl ifconfig.me
This shows your public IP address.

Tiny cheat sheet
sleep 300 & = run in background.

jobs = list jobs.

fg = bring to front.

bg = send to back.

nice = set priority when starting.

renice = change priority later.

ps aux | grep = find process.

nohup = keep running after terminal closes.

IP address = network address of a device.